# Sitting in an Airport


At 5:10AM my alarm went off signaling the start of my journey back to college for the last time. In a daze, I fumbled through the dress ties concealed in my overcrowded closet trying to simulate my graduation outfit and how it would be recieved. This mental task crowded out the sense of urgency one should adopt when waking up 1.5 hours before your flight takes off. The check in lady had to repeat, "You need to change your flight," a few times to crack my blank pasty face into a scoul. Unsurprisingly, the TSA queue amplified my self loathing. In the terminal, I was stuck without a gate number and 5 hours to kill. A mediocre coffee pastry combo in hand, I found a little table to get some work done and await my fate. In my search for the perfect tie that morning, I had neglected to bring a sweater for the airport, and the cold air and table top made comfort an impossibility. Having no idea when a gate would be assigned to my flight, I had no recourse to improve my position. Miffed by the imperminacy of it all, I realized that I was in purgatory. 

This was all interupted by the quiet voice of a middle aged indian man craning down towards me from an elevated ramp down to my frigid cell. "You can't stay here" he asserted. Instantly infuriated, I repeated his statement back at him in a deadly tone. "Yes" he simply replied. I slammed my planner and laptop closed having just laid them out for a work session. The indian man observed calmly and asked for my flight number. After showing him my ticket, I retorted, "My flight is in 5 hours. They have *not* assigned a gate yet." He gently ushered me up the ramp and said, "C34 is your gate number." 

I emerged from the bus ramp into a vaulted chamber that must have been the only room in Laguardia with a cieling over 9 feet high. The temperature of the room must have been only a few degrees warmer, but It made all the difference to my exposed limbs. My ashen face was rekindled by the warm light eminating from an italian bar/cafe playing [You make me feel so young](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TZNIKZdoehE). Sinatra and relief is a wonderful combination. Sitting down, I couldn't help but notice an angelic waitress saunter past my table. Where before I was forced to clutch my coffee for warmth and sustenance, I could now sate my hunger on the slightest whim. Despite the fact that I was sitting in one of the lowest ranked airports in America waiting for a flight that departed in 4 hours, I was in heaven. I found peace as around me a multitude of characters bustled past in their own worlds. Inspired, I took out my laptop to write this blog post. 

I am not a very religious person. If I were, I would assert right now that I encountered our lord and savior Jesus Christ. I offered no respect or coridiallity to this individual. He most likely was at the start of long and arduous shift dealing with disgruntled air travelers. He had no incentive to help me. But while incentives run the world, this man did not yield to the temptation to be punitive. Instead of matching my insolence, he turned the other cheek and showed me a sort of non-transactional compassion that is so rare these days. 

However, Jesus died already so it couldn't have been him. This was just a human who actualized the utility of religion in human societies just in time for me have something to do while sitting in the airport. In a family or small tribe where compassion is instinctual, you don't need a reminder to empathize with your fellow man. The invention of Christianity was to turn every stranger irregardless of their race, religion or character into family member deserving of love and sacrifice. This idea is introduced in the beginning of the new testament by Saul of Tarthus a former outsider who is renamed Paul and procedes to beckon all sorts of people into christianity that would have been deffered by the covanent club known as Judaism. By treating others they way you would like to be treated, human interaction and discourse is softened and relieved of course altering emotions. Useful mesages like these are packed so compactly into the Bible, it is a shame most millenials regard it as enthusiast drivel. The 2000+ page book serves as a guide on how to act in relation to others. This code of conduct was the first thing that humans decided to record. It conveys deep truths in intentionally ambiguous stories that invite further conversation about meanings and implications. Despite the claims of critical race theorists ([1619](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_1619_Project)), it was protistant religious tradition that provided the ideological foundation that underpinned growth of the society we see today. However, while I believe a culture of forgiveness and small local government was the direct predesessor to the cooperative union of colonies, the prosperity of the new world was mostly spurned by other factors like comitment to private property and individual liberty. The calm waters of Religion allowed our society to evolve unperturbed by petty infighitng and guided by the forces of liberty and opportunity.

A foundling nation is freed to focus on productive enterprises when the most troubling and time consuming questions are answred en masse by religion. However, in a vacuum, dogma is quite harmful. Sam Harris is a big proponent of this position. He points to the fact that we are stuck clutching a bag of antiquated ideas that have a direct retarding effect on progress and human quality of life. Classic examples are creationism and anti-homosexual fervor. Ayn Rand points out that even the most innocent of ideas like indescriminately loving thy neighbor may have harmful effects like centralization of government power designed to redistribute wealth to the less fortunate, or inevitably, the less productive. Obviously, many would disagree that this is a bad thing, but in general, data suggests that social spending asside from education has very little effect on long term prosperity. To the contrary, protecting the right property rights has lifted over a billion people from relative poverty. This is a topic for another time. The main question is can we forge a tradition of social cooperation that preserves my interaction with the airport atendant while casting off the harmful baggage?

I lean towards yes. Dogma is an artifact of the human implementation of religios interpretation not a core element to the abstract idea of religion. Remember, the ambiguity inherent to the central texts passed down from our ancestors. This freedom to interpret means that not all Christians are creationists and many churches welcome homosexuals into their congregations. Why can't a sect of christianity interperet the bible as a cultural document written by humans that encodes the foundational wisdom of our society? I would call it objectivist, but its already taken. 


I don't think that there is a problem with passing down values and ways of living through a practiced tradition and a corpus of myths. It is the dogma that humans inevitably construct to legitimize these ideas. Far beyond a fledgeling society, I think we are ready to cast off the lies that moore us to a version of reality and embrace the unknown as something to cherish instead of something to fear. As the christians built upon the ideas of the jews and the prodistants upon the early christians, we can construct a new pseudo religious aparachik that places value in the unknown as an opporunity to experiment and learn. In effect we must incorporate the lessons learned from the enlightenment and the scientific revolution into our cultural fabric. To be clear, I am not supporting the popular trend that treats science as a replacement to the absolute authority of god. This seems to comfort leftists who lack meaning in their lives. Instead, we can incorporate the ethos of the scientific method into our traditions. It strikes me that the philosophy of science which is centered around rigorous experiments that probe the unknown can extend to interpersonal interaction. Treat others the way you want to be treated *and* treat others as an opportunity to experiment with a new worldview and learn something new. The incredible diversity of human experience and professional specializations means that practically every single human can teach you something valuable. A conversation is an opportunity to discover that thing. Simply placing value on learning and growth instead of a cosmic certainty that has all the answers, I think we can solve most of the problems with present day religion. We don't need to re-invent the wheel. Weekly gatherings to reflect and commune would be really productive especially if they included opportunities to discuss disagreement and complicated ideas removed from the distortionary influence of social media. Perhaps if the government didn't take half our income, these gatherings could focus on charitable action in the community. 

FOOTNOTE. clearly, the point of departure for religion is myth and layered meaning, but the centralizing forces of social groups tend to manipulate the messages to implement greater control over others. Early ambiguity allowed for constant discussion and big questions to be asked... Over time human factions solidified certain interpretations into dogmatic structures that cut off interpretive discussion. For example, the council of Nicea. 

Disregard footnotes.

FOOTNOTE: I will write another post specifically about this, but for now will have to assume it. also link study about ROI of social spending. 


FOOTNOTE(This may seem like an unfair shot at liberals, but having just walked past a yard garnered with BLM and democrat cadidate signs acompanied by a sign saying WE *BELIEVE* IN SCIENCE... You can't make this shit up. Conservatives also have dogmatic tendencies whether is trumpism or a perverse version of christianity that keeps people satiated with their own ignorance) 

FOOTNOTE While sitting in the airport writing this, I saw a husband approach his wife and say "Ani, I got you an apple and a water" she said "I already have 5 apples in my bag" to which he replied "Well now you have six!" In the following silence, his smile slowly faded.