
# Book of Why Chapter 1:

Pearl claims that there is a heirarchy of causal reasoning that begins with observation of the environment then steps to alteration of the environment and finally ends with ability to predict the future of an environment in a given state. He associates the incredible cognitive leap by humans as a mastery of these three steps. In a word our ability to **engineer** things greatly depends on these three steps. We must be able predict if this then that, but in order to do that we must be able to change things and observe their results so we can build a model of what types of things cause what other types of things to happen, but in order to do that we need to be able to observe our environment in a largely reduced dimension and identify the principle axis of evolution in the data streams that we recieve. This maps quite well onto my discussion of evolution building up a sensory layer and simultaneously using that sensory input to guide the evolution of an action or control layer. Clearly, evolution is the most prolific engineer, and so the three layers of causal inference must be implicit in the algorithm somehow even though it is not concious. Evolution percieves information from the environment through the number of lives created and the number lives ended. It has the ability to change the environment through random gene mutation which then must express itself as some structure in the physical world that is equivilent to pearl's do() concept. Finally, it is running on many instances at once (a species), but their genome is changing simultaneously which effectively allows it to "know" what would have happened if it had not made a change which is Pearl's counterfactual analalysis that he claims is the secret to causal reasoning. By running multiple worlds at once, evolution anthroprmorphically has a **reason** to choose the animal that survives. It's as if a human decided to take the last class in thier major requirements because when they simulated the causal effects of **not** doing so, the outcome was worse for the objective function of graduating college. Survival is simultaneously the objective function from an optimization perspective, and the signal/data from a causal inference perspective. 